4
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology:Advances and Applications
Moses Okechukwu Onyesolu1 and Felista Udoka Eze2
1Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, Anambra State.
2Federal University of Technology, Owerri, Imo State,
Nigeria
1. Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) is not an entirely new concept; it has existed in various forms since the
late 1960s. It has been known by names such as synthetic environment, cyberspace, artificial
reality, simulator technology and so on and so forth before VR was eventually adopted. The
latest manifestation of VR is desktop VR. Desktop VR is also known by other names such as
Window on World (WoW) or non-immersive VR (Onyesolu, 2006). As a result of
proliferation of desktop VR, the technology has continued to develop applications that are
less than fully immersive. These non-immersive VR applications are far less expensive and
technically daunting and have made inroads into industry training and development. VR
has perhaps at last come within the realm of possibility for general creation and use most
especially in education where computer-based virtual learning environments (VLE) are
packaged as desktop VR. This, in turn, points the way for its inclusion in educational
programs (Ausburn & Ausburn, 2004). These computer-based virtual learning environments
(VLEs) have opened new realms in the teaching, learning, and practice of medicine, physical
sciences and engineering among others. VLEs provide students with the opportunity to
achieve learning goals. VLE-based applications have thus emerged in mainstream education
in schools and universities as successful tools to supplement traditional teaching methods.
These learning environments have been discovered to have greater pedagogical
effectiveness on learners. Virtual learning environments provide three-dimensional (3D)
insights into the structures and functions of any system desired. Students can thereby learn
the principles of such system in a fast, effective and pleasurable way by interacting with and
navigating through the environment created for such system (Onyesolu, 2009a; Onyesolu,
2009b). It is known that VR can make the artificial as realistic as, and even more realistic
than, the real (Negroponte, 1995).
2. The technology: Virtual Reality
There are some people to whom VR is a specific collection of technologies; that is, headset,
glove and walker (Haag et al., 1998; Williams & Sawyer, 2001; Isdale, 1993). VR is defined as
a highly interactive, computer-based multimedia environment in which the user becomes
the participant in a computer-generated world (Kim et al., 2000; Onyesolu, 2009a; Onyesolu
& Akpado, 2009). It is the simulation of a real or imagined environment that can be
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
54
experienced visually in the three dimensions of width, height, and depth and that may
additionally provide an interactive experience visually in full real-time motion with sound
and possibly with tactile and other forms of feedback. VR is a way for humans to visualize,
manipulate and interact with computers and extremely complex data (Isdale, 1998). It is an
artificial environment created with computer hardware and software and presented to the
user in such a way that it appears and feels like a real environment (Baieier, 1993). VR is a
computer-synthesized, three-dimensional environment in which a plurality of human
participants, appropriately interfaced, may engage and manipulate simulated physical
elements in the environment and, in some forms, may engage and interact with
representations of other humans, past, present or fictional, or with invented creatures. It is a
computer-based technology for simulating visual auditory and other sensory aspects of
complex environments (Onyesolu, 2009b). VR incorporates 3D technologies that give a reallife
illusion. VR creates a simulation of real-life situation (Haag et al., 1998).
Therefore, VR refers to an immersive, interactive, multi-sensory, viewer-centered, 3D
computer-generated environment and the combination of technologies required to build
such an environment (Aukstakalnis & Blatner, 1992; Cruz-Niera, 1993). By immersing
viewers in a computer-generated stereoscopic environment, VR technology breaks down
barriers between humans and computers. VR technology simulates natural stereoscopic
viewing processes by using computer technology to create right-eye and left-eye images of a
given 3D object or scene. The viewer’s brain integrates the information from these two
perspectives to create the perception of 3D space. Thus, VR technology creates the illusion
that on-screen objects have depth and presence beyond the flat image projected onto the
screen. With VR technology, viewers can perceive distance and spatial relationships
between different object components more realistically and accurately than with
conventional visualization tools (such as traditional CAD tools).
3. Virtual Reality components
The components necessary for building and experiencing VR are divided into two main
components-the hardware components and the software components.
3.1 Hardware components
The hardware components are divided into five sub-components: computer workstation,
sensory displays, process acceleration cards, tracking system and input devices.
3.1.1 Computer workstation
A computer workstation is a high-end microcomputer designed for technical or scientific
applications. Intended primarily to be used by one person at a time, workstations are
commonly connected to a local area network and run multi-user operating systems. The
term workstation has also been used to refer to a mainframe computer terminal or a
personal computer (PC) connected to a network.
Workstations had offered higher performance than personal computers, especially with
respect to CPU and graphics, memory capacity and multitasking capability. They are
optimized for the visualization and manipulation of different types of complex data such as
3D mechanical design, engineering simulation animation and rendering of images, and
mathematical plots. Workstations are the first segment of the computer market to present
advanced accessories and collaboration tools. Presently, the workstation market is highly
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
55
commoditized and is dominated by large PC vendors, such as Dell and HP, selling
Microsoft Windows/Linux running on Intel Xeon/AMD Opteron. Alternative UNIX based
platforms are provided by Apple Inc., Sun Microsystems, and Silicon Graphics International
(SGI) (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workstation). Computer workstation is used to
control several sensory display devices to immerse you in 3D virtual environment.
3.1.2 Sensory displays
Sensory displays are used to display the simulated virtual worlds to the user. The most
common sensory displays are the computer visual display unit, the head-mounted display
(HMD) for 3D visual and headphones for 3D audio.
3.1.2.1 Head mounted displays
Head mounted displays place a screen in front of each of the viewer's eyes at all times. The
view, the segment of the virtual environment generated and displayed, is controlled by
orientation sensors mounted on the “helmet”. Head movement is recognized by the
computer, and a new perspective of the scene is generated. In most cases, a set of optical
lens and mirrors are used to enlarge the view to fill the field of view and to direct the scene
to the eyes (Lane, 1993).
Fig. 1. Visette 45 SXGA Head Mounted Display (HMD)
3.1.2.2 Binocular Omni-Orientation Monitor (BOOM)
The BOOM is mounted on a jointed mechanical arm with tracking sensors located at the
joints. A counterbalance is used to stabilize the monitor, so that when the user releases the
monitor, it remains in place. To view the virtual environment, the user must take hold of the
monitor and put her face up to it. The computer will generate an appropriate scene based on
the position and orientation of the joints on the mechanical arm (Aukstakalnis & Blatner,
Fig. 2. A Binocular Omni-Orientation Monitor (BOOM)
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
56
1992). Some of the problems associated with HMDs can be solved by using a BOOM display.
The user does not have to wear a BOOM display as in the case of an HMD. This means that
crossing the boundary between a virtual world and the real world is simply a matter of
moving your eyes away from the BOOM.
3.1.2.3 Visual Display Unit (VDU) or monitors
There are two types of computer visual display unit. The CRT monitors and the LCD
monitors. The distinguishing characteristics of the two types are beyond the scope of this
piece.
3.1.3 Process acceleration cards
These cards help to update the display with new sensory information. Examples are 3D
graphic cards and 3D sound cards.
3.1.4 Tracking system
This system tracks the position and orientation of a user in the virtual environment. This
system is divided into: mechanical, electromagnetic, ultrasonic and infrared trackers.
Fig. 3. Patriot wireless electromagnetic tracker
Fig. 4. Logitech ultrasonic tracker
3.1.5 Input devices
They are used to interact with the virtual environment and objects within the virtual
environment. Examples are joystick (wand), instrumented glove, keyboard, voice
recognition etc.
3.2 Software components
The software components are divided into four sub-components: 3D modeling software, 2D
graphics software, digital sound editing software and VR simulation software.
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
57
Fig. 5. An instrumented glove (Nintendo power glove)
3.2.1 3D modeling software
3D modeling software is used in constructing the geometry of the objects in a virtual world
and specifies the visual properties of these objects.
3.2.2 2D graphics software
2D graphics software is used to manipulate texture to be applied to the objects which
enhance their visual details.
3.2.3 Digital sound editing software
Digital sound editing software is used to mix and edit sounds that objects make within the
virtual environment.
3.2.3 VR simulation software
Simulation software brings the components together. It is used to program how these
objects behave and set the rules that the virtual world follows.
4. Classification of Virtual Reality systems
VR is classified into three major types: (a) Non-Immersive VR Systems, (b) Semi-Immersive
VR Systems and (c) Immersive (Fully Immersive) VR systems. Other forms of classification
are levels of VR and methods of VR. Levels of VR deals with efforts employed to develop
VR technology. Under this classification we have entry level, basic level, advanced level,
immersive systems and big-time systems. Methods of VR classification deals with methods
employed in developing VR system. Under this class we have simulation based systems,
projector based systems, avatar-image based systems and desktop based system.
4.1 Non-immersive VR systems
As the name suggests, are the least implementation of VR techniques. It involves
implementing VR on a desktop computer. This class is also known as Window on World
(WoW) (Onyesolu, 2006). Using the desktop system, the virtual environment is viewed
through a portal or window by utilizing a standard high resolution monitor. Interaction
with the virtual environment can occur by conventional means such as keyboard, mouse or
trackball
4.2 Semi-immersive VR systems
A semi immersive VR system comprise of a relatively high performance graphics computing
system which can be coupled with either a large screen monitor; a large screen projection
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
58
system or multiple television projection system. Using a wide field of view, these systems
increase the feeling of immersion or presence experienced by the user and stereographic
imaging can be achieved using some type of shutter glasses.
4.3 Immersive (fully immersive) VR systems
An Immersive VR system is the most direct experience of virtual environments. Here the
user either wears an head mounted display (HMD) or uses some form of head-coupled
display such as a Binocular Omni-Orientation Monitor (BOOM) to view the virtual
environment, in addition to some tracking devices and haptic devices. An HMD or BOOM
uses small monitors placed in front of each eye which provide stereo, bi-ocular or
monocular images.
Fig. 6. Schematic representation of a CAVE
5. Low-cost VR technology
Low-cost VR, also called personal computer (PC)-based VR, uses inexpensive devices such
as PC workstations and VR glasses, combined with VR-enabled software applications or
playstations and projectors, to partially immerse viewers in a virtual scene (Fang et al., n.d.).
Fig 5 is a low-cost VR system developed with three playstations, a network switch and two
projectors.
Fig. 7. PlayStation2 VR system
Projectors
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
59
The benefits of low cost virtual reality hardware are obvious; high performance systems
which were previously exclusive to research institutions with well funded budget can now
be constructed relatively cheaper. The reduced price/performance ratio has positive
implications for hospitals, educational institutions, museums and other organizations where
funding of new technologies are often limited. Previously disadvantaged communities can
also benefit from this new technology. In education, cheap VR can provide massive quality
education through the interactive learning environment; in medicine, cheap virtual
environment has been shown to provide promising results in the field of exposure therapy
(Fang et al., n.d.).
6. How Virtual Reality works
The idea behind VR is to deliver a sense of being there by giving at least the eye what it
would have received if it were there and, more important to have the image change
instantly as the point of view is changed (Smith & Lee, 2004). The perception of spatial
reality is driven by various visual cues, like relative size, brightness and angular movement.
One of the strongest is perspective, which is particularly powerful in its binocular form in
that the right and left eyes see different images. Fusing these images into one 3D perception
is the basis of stereovision.
The perception of depth provided by each eye seeing a slightly different image, eye parallax,
is most effective for objects very near you. Objects farther away essentially cast the same
image on each eye. The typical dress code for VR is a helmet with goggle-like displays, one
for each eye. Each display delivers a slightly different perspective image of what you would
see if you were there. As you move your head, the image rapidly updates so that you feel
you are making these changes by moving your head (versus the computer actually
following your movement, which it is). You feel you are the cause not the effect.
7. VR development tools and resources
There are many VR development tools and resources. Some of these tools and resources are
free (open source to use), some are proprietary (closed source) (Wang & Canon, 1996). VR
related development is in progress regarding the availability, usability and capability of
customization for existing development tools and resources. VR development tools and
resources are quite numerous; some examples are presented:
7.1 Virtual Heroes Inc. (VHI)
This is an “Advanced Learning Technology Company” that creates collaborative interactive
learning solutions for Federal Systems, Healthcare and Corporate Training markets
(http://www.virtualheroes.com/about.asp). VHI applications facilitate highly interactive,
self-paced learning and instructor-led, distributed team training on its Advanced Learning
Technology (ALT) platform. Major components of this platform include the Unreal® Engine
3 by Epic Games, and Dynamic Virtual Human Technology (DVHT). ALT leverages
simulation learning and digital game-based learning paradigms to accelerate learning,
increase proficiency and reduce costs. DVHT combines best-in-class electronic computer
game technology with a digital human physiology engine, digital pharmacokinetic drug
models, accurate biomechanical parameters and artificial intelligence subroutines for the
most realistic virtual humans available anywhere.
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
60
7.2 On-Line Interactive Virtual Environment (OLIVE)
This is a product of Forterra Systems Inc. Forterra Systems Inc. builds distributed virtual
world technology and turnkey applications for defense, homeland security, medical,
corporate training, and entertainment industries (http://company.mmosite.com/forterra
/index.shtml). Using the On-Line Interactive Virtual Environment (OLIVE) technology
platform, customers can rapidly generate realistic three-dimensional virtual environments
that easily scale from single user applications to large scale simulated environments
supporting many thousands of concurrent users. Forterra’s technology and services enable
organizations to train, plan, rehearse, and collaborate in ways previously considered
impossible or impractical.
OLIVE combines multimedia, scalable computing and network enabled connectivity to
provide a complete IT-ready platform for developing and supporting truly collaborative,
multiplayer interactive virtual environments. It is a 3D client-server virtual world platform
using PC clients connected to a central server via a network. The architecture scales from a
Windows based development environment to large scale Linux clusters. This architecture
supports many thousands of concurrent, geographically distributed users
(http://www.webbuyersguide.com/product/brief.aspx?src=rss&kc=rss&id=52841)
7.3 Icarus Studios Inc.
The company offers tools and products for creating massively multi-player online (MMO)
environments, virtual worlds, and serious games for major entertainment, corporate, and
government clients (Mousa, n.d). Icarus provides next generation technology, tools and
production services enabling publishers and marketers to develop immersive environments
to create new revenue streams and branding opportunities (http://www.icarusstudios.com/).
Icarus Studios products include compatibility with industry standard tools such as 3D Max,
Collada, and other 3D applications with simple editors.
7.4 OpenSimulator (OpenSim)
OpenSimulator is a 3D application server. It can be used to create a virtual environment
(world) which can be accessed through a variety of clients, on multiple protocols (Mousa,
n.d). OpenSimulator allows you to develop your environment using technologies you feel
work best. OpenSimulator has numerous advantages which among other things are:
i. OpenSimulator is released under BSD license, making it both open source, and
commercially friendly to embed in products.
ii. It has many tools for developers to build various applications (chat application,
buildings, and avatars among others).
iii. OpenSimulator can be extended via modules to build completely custom configuration.
iv. It is a world building tools for creating content real time in the environment.
v. Supports many programming languages for application development such as Linden
Scripting Language / OpenSimulator Scripting Language (LSL/OSSL), C#, and/or
Jscript and VB.NET
vi. It incorporates rich and handy documentations and tutorials.
7.5 Croquet
Croquet is an open source 3D graphical platform that is used by experienced software
developers to create and deploy deeply collaborative multi-user online virtual world
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
61
applications on and across multiple operating systems and devices
(http://www.opencroquet.org/index.php/Main_Page). Croquet is a next generation virtual
operating system (OS) written in Squeak. Squeak is a modern variant of Smalltalk. Squeak
runs mathematically identical on all machines. Croquet system features a peer-based
messaging protocol that dramatically reduces the need for server infrastructures to support
virtual world deployment and makes it easy for software developers to create deeply
collaborative applications. Croquet provides rich tutorials, resources and videos
as educational materials for developers.
7.6 Ogoglio
Ogoglio is an open source 3D graphical platform like Croquet. The main goal of the Ogoglio
is to build an online urban style space for creative collaboration. Ogoglio platform is built
from the languages and protocols of the web. Therefore, it’s scripting language is javascript;
it’s main data transfer protocol is hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), it’s 2D layout is
hypertext markup language (HTML) and cascading style sheet (CSS), and it has lightwave
object geometry format for its 3D (http://foo.secondlifeherald.com/slh/2007/01/
interview_with_.html). Ogoglio is very different from the other virtual reality world
development platforms because it uses Windows, Linux, Solaris operating system platforms
and runs on web browsers such as Internet Explorer, Firefox, and Safari.
7.7 QuickDraw 3D (QD3D)
QuickDraw 3D is a 3D graphics API developed by Apple Inc. in 1995. It was delivered as a
cross-platform system, though originally developed for their Macintosh computers. QD3D
provides a high-level API with a rich set of 3D primitives that is generally much more fullfeatured
and easier to develop than low-level APIs such as OpenGL or Direct3D.
7.8 Autodesk 3d Max (3D Studio MAX)
Autodesk 3d Max (formerly known as 3D Studio MAX) is a modeling, animation and
rendering package developed by Autodesk Media and entertainment. 3d Max is the third
most widely-used off the shelf 3D animation program by content creation professionals. It
has strong modeling capabilities, a flexible plugin architecture and a long heritage on the
Microsoft Windows platform. It is mostly used by video game developers, television
commercial studios and architectural visualization studios. It is also used for movie effects
and movie pre-visualization.
7.9 Blink 3D Builder
Blink 3D Builder is a proprietary authoring tool for creating immersive 3D environments.
The 3D environments can be viewed using the Blink 3D Viewer on the Web or locally.
8. Applications and advancements in VR technology
There are a lot of applications and advancements in VR technology. VR is being applied in
all areas of human endeavour and many VR applications have been developed for
manufacturing, training in a variety of areas ( military, medical, equipment operation, etc.),
education, simulation, design evaluation (virtual prototyping), architectural walk-through,
ergonomic studies, simulation of assembly sequences and maintenance tasks, assistance for
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
62
the handicapped, study and treatment of phobias (e.g., fear of height), entertainment, rapid
prototyping and much more (Onyesolu, 2006). This has been made possible due to the
power of VR in transporting customers to a virtual environment and convincing them of
their presence in it (Wittenberg, 1993).
In industry, VR has proven to be an effective tool for helping workers evaluates product
designs. In 1999, BMW explored the capability of VR for verifying product designs (Gomes
de Sa & Zachmann, 1999). They concluded that VR has the potential to reduce the number of
physical mockups needed to improve overall product quality, and to obtain quick answers
in an intuitive way during the concept phase of a product. In addition, Motorola developed
a VR system for training workers to run a pager assembly line (Wittenberg, 1995). They
found that VR can be used to successfully train manufacturing personnel, and that
participants trained in VR environments perform better on the job than those trained for the
same time in real environments.
In 1998, GE Corporate Research developed two VR software applications, Product Vision
and Galileo, which allowed engineers to interactively fly through a virtual jet engine
(Abshire, & Barron, 1998). They reported that the two applications were used successfully to
enhance design communication and to solve maintenance problems early, with minimal
cost, delays, and effort. They also reported that using the VR applications helped make
maintenance an integral part of their product design process.
The success stories from industry show that VR-technology-literate professionals are a
present and future industry need. However, most students currently do not have an
opportunity to experience VR technologies while they are in school. Therefore, introducing
VR into design and graphics curricula is imperative, to keep pace with the changing needs
of industry.
Boeing (the largest aircraft manufacturers in the world) developed the Virtual Space
eXperiment (VSX). VSX is a demonstration of how virtual environment systems can be
applied to the design of aircraft and other complex systems involving human interactions
(Kalawsky, 1993). It is a 3D virtual model of the interior and exterior of a tilt-rotor aircraft in
virtual space that allows persons to interact with various items such as maintenance hatch,
cargo ramp. McDonnell Douglas uses a ProVision 100 VPX system to evaluate how a virtual
environment can aid the design of new engine types. The system is utilized to explore the
processes for installing and removing engines, especially for detecting the potential interface
with other devices. The automotive industry starts to use the VR technology to design and
build cars. It can take two years or more to advance from the development of an initial
concept for a new type of car to the moment that a production version rolls off the assembly
line.
A virtual reality-based point-and-direct (VR-PAD) system was developed to improve the
flexibility in passive robot inspection (Wang & Cannon, 1996). An operator in a remote
control room monitors the real working environment through live video views displayed on
the screen and uses the virtual gripper to indicate desirable picking and placing locations.
The robot in the inspection system completes material handling as specified so that the
system can achieve flaw identification. The CERN, European Laboratory for Particle
Physics, performed the pilot project that evaluated and promoted the use of virtual
environment technology to help design, building and maintaining the Large Hedron
Collider (LHC) premises and equipment (Balaguer & Gennaro, 1996). The project consists of
several applications, such as network design and integration, territory impact study, and
assembly planning and control to respond to the needs of LHC engineers.
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
63
Virtual Reality is a powerful tool for education since people comprehend images much
faster than they grasp lines of text or columns of numbers. VR offers multisensory
immersive environments that engage students and allow them visualize information
(Eslinger, 1993). Mathematics and science teachers have used VR for explaining abstract
spatial data. Winn and Bricken (1992) used VR to help students learn elementary algebra.
They used three-dimensional space to express algebraic concepts and to interact with spatial
representations in a virtual environment. They concluded that VR has the potential for
making a significant improvement in the way students learn mathematics. Haufmann et al
(2000) used VR in mathematics and geometry education, especially in vector analysis and
descriptive geometry. Their survey showed that all participants (10 students) rated VR as a
very good playground for experiments, and all participants wanted to experience VR again.
Students also thought it was easier to view a 3D world in VR rather than on a flat screen.
VR was used to demonstrate molecular mechanisms in chemical engineering courses (Bell,
1996; Bell & Fogler, 1998). Though no statistical analysis was provided, some evidence of
enhanced learning in some cases was reported. At the University of Michigan, Vicher
(Virtual Chemical Reactors) was developed in the department of Chemical Engineering to
teach students catalyst decay, non-isothermal effects in kinetics and reactor design and
chemical plant safety (Bell & Fogler, 1996a; Bell & Fogler, 1996b). The developers believed
that humans retain up to 90% of what they learn through active participation. The most
exciting possibilities in terms of education and VR are found as it is implemented in the
education of the disabled.
Sulbaran and Baker (2000) created an online learning system to study the effectiveness of VR
in engineering education. They used VR to train participants on how to operate a lock and
to identify construction machines. They found that 82% of learners thought learning with
VR was more engaging than learning from reading books and listening to lectures using
overheads containing graphics or pictures. They also found, in their first survey, that 69% of
the students thought they had learned how a lock operates, and 57% thought they had
learned how to identify construction machines. 7 to 21 days later, 92% of the students were
still able to operate a lock and identify construction machines. Finally, in their second
survey, 91% of the learners strongly agreed or agreed that the learning experience benefits
from the use of VR.
VR technology promises to shorten a product development cycle greatly by skipping the
need for physical mockups (Vince, 1995). The Ford’s Alpha simultaneous engineering team
developed a VR system for evaluating process installation feasibility in automotive
assembly. In Japan, customers bring the architectural layout of their home kitchen to the
Matsushita store and plug it into the computer system to generate its virtual copy
(Newquist III, 1993). They can install appliances and cabinets, and change colors and sizes to
see what their complete kitchen will look like without ever installing a single item in the
actual location. Similarly, Mike Rosen and Associates has been using an interactive and
immersive VR technology to assist its building industry clients in the design, visualization,
marketing, and sales (Neil, 1996). The applications let the customers become actively
involved in the visualization process, such as making changes of colors, textures, materials,
lighting, and furniture on the fly.
Researchers at NASA Johnson Space Center in Texas have developed an impressive virtual
learning environment for high school students--a virtual physics laboratory which enables
students to explore such concepts as gravity, friction, and drag in an interactive, virtual
environment. Students have several balls and a pendulum with which to work. They also
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
64
have several investigative tools, such as a distance measuring device and a digital
stopwatch. In addition, the computer provides several interesting capabilities such as the
ability to view dynamic events in slow motion or to show trails on objects to better show
their movements (Dedula, 1997).
9. The impact of VR
There has been increasing interest in the potential social impact of VR. VR will lead to a
number of important changes in human life and activity (Cline, 2005). Cline (2005) argued
that: VR will be integrated into daily life and activity and it will be used in various human
ways; techniques will be developed to influence human behavior, interpersonal
communication, and cognition (i.e., virtual genetics); as we spend more and more time in
virtual space, there will be a gradual “migration to virtual space,” resulting in important
changes in economics, worldview, and culture and the design of virtual environments may
be used to extend basic human rights into virtual space, to promote human freedom and
well-being, and to promote social stability as we move from one stage in socio-political
development to the next. VR has had and is still having impact in heritage and archeology,
mass media, fiction books, television, motion pictures, music videos, games, fine arts,
marketing, health care, therapeutic uses, real estates and others numerous to mention.
9.1 Heritage and archaeology
The first use of a VR presentation in a Heritage application was in 1994 when a museum
visitor interpretation provided an interactive “walk-through” of a 3D reconstruction of
Dudley Castle in England as it was in 1550 (Colin, 2006). This comprised of a computer
controlled laser disc based system designed by British-based engineer Colin Johnson. The
use of VR in Heritage and Archaeology has enormous potential in museum and visitor
centre applications. There have been many historic reconstructions. These reconstructions
are presented in a pre-rendered format to a shared video display, thus allowing more than
one person to view a computer generated world, but limiting the interaction that full-scale
VR can provide.
9.2 Mass media
Mass media has been a great advocate and perhaps a great hindrance to the development of
VR over the years. In 1980s and 1990s the news media’s prognostication on the potential of
VR built up the expectations of the technology so high as to be impossible to achieve under
the technology then or any technology to date. Entertainment media reinforced these
concepts with futuristic imagery many generations beyond contemporary capabilities
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/virtual reality).
9.3 Fiction books
There are many science fiction books which described VR. One of the first modern works to
use this idea was Daniel F. Galouye’s novel “Simulacron-3”. The Piers Anthony’s novel
“Killobyte” follows the story of a paralysed cop trapped in a VR game by a hacker, whom
he must stop to save a fellow trapped player with diabetes slowly succumbing to insulin
shock. The first fictional work to fully describe VR was included in the 1951 book-“The
Illustrated Man”. The “Otherland” series of novels by Tad Williams shows a world where
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
65
the Internet has become accessible via VR. It has become so popular and somewhat
commonplace that, with the help of surgical implants, people can connect directly into this
future VR environment. Some other popular fictional works that use the concept of VR
include William Gibson’s “Neuromancer” which defined the concept of cyberspace, Neal
Stephenson’s “Snow Crash”, in which he made extensive reference to the term avatar to
describe one’s representation in a virtual world, and Rudy Rucker’s “The Hacker and the
Ants”, in which programmer Jerzy Rugby uses VR for robot design and testing.
Fig. 8. Fiction books that described Virtual Reality
9.4 Television
Perhaps the earliest example of VR on television is a Doctor Who serial “The Deadly
Assassin”. This story introduced a dream-like computer-generated reality known as the
Matrix. The first major television series to showcase VR was “Star Trek: the Next
Generation”. They featured the holodeck, a VR facility on starships that enabled its users to
recreate and experience anything they wanted. One difference from current VR technology,
however, was that replicators, force fields, holograms, and transporters were used to
actually recreate and place objects in the holodeck, rather than relying solely on the illusion
of physical objects, as is done today.
9.5 Motion pictures
There are a lot of motion pictures that explored and used the idea of VR. Steven Lisberger’s
film “TRON” was the first motion picture to explore the idea. This idea was popularized by
the Wachowski brothers in 1999’s motion picture “The Matrix”. The Matrix was significant
in that it presented VR and reality as often overlapping, and sometimes indistinguishable.
Total Recall and David Cronenberg’s film “ExistenZ” dealt with the danger of confusion
between reality and VR in computer games. Cyberspace became something that most
movies completely misunderstood, as seen in “The Lawnmower Man”. Also, the British
comedy “Red Dwarf” used in several episodes the idea that life is a VR game. This idea was
also used in “Spy Kids 3D: Game Over”. Another movie that has a bizarre theme is
“Brainscan”, where the point of the game is to be a virtual killer. A more artistic and
philosophical perspective on the subject can be seen in Avalon. There is also a film from
1995 called “Virtuosity” with Denzel Washington and Russell Crowe that dealt with the
creation of a serial killer, used to train law enforcement personnel, that escapes his VR into
the real world.
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
66
9.6 Music videos
The lengthy video for hard rock band Aerosmith’s 1993 single “Amazing” depicted VR,
going so far as to show two young people participating in VR simultaneously from their
separate personal computers (while not knowing the other was also participating in it) in
which the two engage in a steamy makeout session, sky-dive, and embark on a motorcycle
journey together.
9.7 Games
A lot of industries sprang up and started developing VR games. In 1991, the W Industries
released a VR gaming system called the 1000CS. This was a stand-up immersive HMD
platform with a tracked 3D joystick. The system featured several VR games including
“Dactyl Nightmare”, “Legend Quest”, “Hero”, and “Grid Busters”. There were other games
developed such as “VR World 3D Color Ninja”, “VR Wireless TV Tennis Game”, “Mage: the
Ascension”, “Kingdom Hearts II”, “System Shock”, “System Shock2”, and “VR 3D
Drangonflight” among others.
9.8 Fine art
Fine art is also influenced by VR. Artists stated to create impressions using VR. David Em
was the first fine artist to create navigable virtual worlds. Jeffrey Shaw explored the
potential of VR in fine arts with early works like “Legible City”, “Virtual Museum”, and
“Golden Calf”. Char Davies created immersive VR art pieces in “Osmose” and “Ephémère”.
Works such as “Is God Flat”, The “Tunnel under the Atlantic “, and “World Skin”, by
Maurice Benayoun introduced metaphorical, philosophical or political content, combining
VR, network, generation and intelligent agents. There are other pioneering artists working
in VR.
9.9 Marketing
Advertising and merchandise have been associated with VR. There are a lot of television
commercials using VR. TV commercials featuring VR have been made products, such as
Nike’s “Virtual Andre”. This commercial features a teenager playing tennis using a goggle
and gloves system against a computer generated Andre Agassi. There are some others
commercials as seen in most English premier league commercials.
9.10 Health care
VR is finding its way into the training of health care professionals. Use ranges from anatomy
instruction to surgery simulation. VR also has numerous applications that can be directly
related to health care. In a white paper on the use of Virtual Environments for Health Care,
Moline (1995) indicated several areas where patient care can be assisted by VR techniques.
These include the use of VR for remote tele-surgery; the use of VR techniques in local
surgery such as endoscopy, where the surgeon manipulates instruments by viewing a TV
monitor; the use of virtual environments as surgical simulators or trainers; the use of virtual
environments as therapy devices to reduce anxiety or fear. One example is dentists using 3D
eyeglasses to divert a patient’s attention during dental operations and the use of virtual
environments to reduce phobias such as agoraphobia and vertigo. North et al (1996)
provided an overview of current work in the use of VR techniques to reduce phobias in their
book VR Therapy.
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
67
9.11 Therapeutic uses
The primary use of VR in a therapeutic role is its application to various forms of exposure
therapy, ranging from phobia treatments, to newer approaches to treating Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD) (Goslin & Morie, 1996; Krijn, 2005; Schuemie, 2003; Schuemie et al.,
2001). A very basic VR simulation with simple sight and sound models has been shown to
be invaluable in phobia treatment as a step between basic exposure therapy such as the use
of simulacra and true exposure (North et al., 1996). A much more recent application is being
piloted by the U.S. Navy to use a much more complex simulation to immerse veterans
(specifically of Iraq) suffering from PTSD in simulations of urban combat settings. Much as
in phobia treatment, exposure to the subject of the trauma or fear seems to lead to
desensitization, and a significant reduction in symptoms.
9.12 Real estate
The real estate sector has used the term VR for websites that offer panoramic images laced
into a viewer such as QuickTime player in which the viewer can rotate to see all 360 degrees
of the image.
10. Advantages and uses of VR
Researchers in the field have generally agreed that VR technology is exciting and can
provide a unique and effective way to learn and that VR projects are highly motivating to
learners (Mantovani et al., 2003). From research, several specific situations have emerged in
which VR has strong benefits or advantages. For example, VR has great value in situations
where exploration of environments or interactions with objects or people is impossible or
inconvenient, or where an environment can only exist in computer-generated form. VR is
also valuable when the experience of actually creating a simulated environment is important
to learning. Creating their own virtual worlds has been shown to enable some students to
master content and to project their understanding of what they have learned (Ausburn &
Ausburn, 2004).
One of the beneficial uses of VR occurs when visualization, manipulation, and interaction
with information are critical for its understanding; it is, in fact, its capacity for allowing
learners to display and interact with information and environment that some believe is VR’s
greatest advantage. Finally, VR is a very valuable instructional and practice alternative
when the real thing is hazardous to learners, instructors, equipment, or the environment.
This advantage of the technology has been cited by developers and researchers from such
diverse fields as firefighting, anti-terrorism training, nuclear decommissioning, crane
driving and safety, aircraft inspection and maintenance, automotive spray painting and
pedestrian safety for children (Ausburn & Ausburn, 2004).
11. Disadvantages and limitations of VR
One important issue in the use of VR is the high level of skill and cost required to develop
and implement VR, particularly immersive systems. Very high levels of programming and
graphics expertise and very expensive hardware and software are necessary to develop
immersive VR, and considerable skill is needed to use it effectively in instruction. While
desktop VR technology has dramatically reduced the skill and cost requirement of virtual
environments, it still demands some investment of money and time.
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
68
Another set of limitations of VR environments stems from the nature of the equipment they
require. A long-standing problem with immersive VR has been health and safety concerns
for its users. The early literature was top-heavy with studies of headaches, nausea, balance
upsets, and other physical effects of HMD systems. While these problems have largely
disappeared from current VR research as the equipment has improved, and appear to be
completely absent in the new desktop systems, little is known about long-term physical or
psychological effects of VR usage. A second equipment limitation of VR arises from the fact
that it is computer-based and requires high-end hardware for successful presentation.
Inadequate computing gear can dramatically limit the response time for navigation and
interaction in a virtual environment, possibly destroying its sense of presence for users and
damaging or destroying its usefulness as a simulation of reality. This response situation
sometimes referred to as the “latency problem” of VR, can also arise from bandwidth
limitations when VR is distributed over a network or the Internet.
12. Conclusion
A lot of advancements have been made using VR and VR technology. VR has cut across all
facets of human endeavours-manufacturing/business, exploration, defense, leisure
activities, and medicine among others. The exciting field of VR has the potential to change
our lives in many ways. There are many applications of VR presently and there will be
many more in the future. Many VR applications have been developed for manufacturing,
education, simulation, design evaluation, architectural walk-through, ergonomic studies,
simulation of assembly sequences and maintenance tasks, assistance for the handicapped,
study and treatment of phobias, entertainment, rapid prototyping and much more. VR
technology is now widely recognized as a major break through in the technological advance
of science.
13. References
Abshire, K. J. & Barron, M. K. (1998). Virtual maintenance: Real-world applications within
virtual environments, IEEE Proceedings Annual Reliability and Maintainability
Symposium, 132-137.
Aukstakalnis, S. & Blatner, D. (1992). Silicon mirage: The art and science of virtual reality.
Peachpit Press, Berkley.
Ausburn, L. J. & Ausburn, F. B. (2004). Desktop virtual reality: A powerful new technology
for teaching and research in industrial teacher education. Journal of Industrial
Technical Education, Vol. 41, No.4, [Online], Available:
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/JITE/v41n4/ausburn.html
Baieier, K.P. (1993). Virtual reality: Short introduction. [Online]. Available:
http://www-vrl.umich.edu/intro.html/
Balaguer, J. & Gennaro, S. (1996). VENUS: A virtual reality project at CERN. Computer
Graphics, 30, 40-43.
Bell, J.T. (1996). Introducing virtual reality into the engineering curriculum, Proc. of
University Programs in Computer Aided Engineering and Design Manufacturing,
Charlottesville, VA. [Online]. Available: http://www.vrupl.evl.uic.edu/vrichel/.
Bell, J.T. &. Fogler, H.S. (1998). Virtual Reality in the Chemical Engineering Classroom, Proc.
of American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference, Seattle, WA.
www.intechopen.com
Understanding Virtual Reality Technology: Advances and Applications
69
Bell, J.T. &. Fogler, H.S. (1996a). Vicher: A prototype virtual reality based educational
module for chemical reaction engineering, Computer Applications in Engineering
Education, 4(4).
Bell, J.T. &. Fogler, H.S. (1996b). Recent developments in virtual reality based education,
Proc. of the American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference,
Washington, DC.
Cline, M. S. (2005). Power, madness, and immortality: The future of virtual reality. [Online].
Available: http://virtualreality.universityvillagepress.com/index.php
Colin, J. (2006). Computer Visualization of Dudley Castle. [Online]. Available:
http://www.extrenda.net/dudley/index.htm
Croquet. [Online]. Available: http://www.opencroquet.org/index.php/Main_Page
Cruz-Niera, C. (1993). Virtual reality overview. Proceeding of ACM SISGRAPH 93 Conference
on Applied Virtual Reality, Anaheim, California.
Dedula, W. T. (1997). About virtual reality and its use in the mobile aeronautics education
laboratory (MAEL). [Online]. Available:
http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/MAELVRSTATION/news_info.html
Eslinger, C. (1993). Education. Encyclopedia of Virtual Environments. World Wide Web URL:
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/scivw/EVE/I.A.1.Displays.html
Fang, K.P., Feng, F.K. & Wai , K.K. (n.d). Low Cost Virtual Reality System: PlayStation 2 VR
system: Technical Report No. CS031900. [Online]. http://cs.uct.ac.za
Forterra System Inc. [Online]. Available:
http://company.mmosite.com/forterra/index.shtml
Gomes de Sa, A. & Zachmann, G. (1999). Virtual reality as a tool for verification of assembly
and maintenance processes, Computers and Graphics, 23, 389-403.
Goslin, M. & Morie, J. F. (1996). Virtopia: Emotional experiences in virtual environments.
Leonardo, 29(2), 95-100.
Haag, S.; Cummings, M., & Dawkins, J. (1998). Management Information Systems for the
Information Age. Irwin/McGraw Hill, ISBN 0-07-025465-6, New York.
Haufmann, H., Schmalstieg, D. & Wagner, M. (2000). Construct3D: A Virtual Reality
Application for Mathematics and Geometry Education, Education and Information
Technologies, 5 (4), 263-276.
Icarus Studio :Worlds Beyond Reality. [Online]. Available: http://www.icarusstudios.com/
Isdale, J. (1998). What is virtual reality? A web-based introduction. Retrieved November 12,
2005. [Online]. Available:
http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition//0.sid9_gci213303,00.html
Isdale, J. (1993). What is virtual reality? A homebrew introduction. Retrieved November 12,
2005. [Online]. Available: http://whatis.techtarget.com
Kalawsky, R. S. (1993). The Science of Virtual Reality and Virtual Environments. Wokingham:
Addison-Wesley
Kim, J., Park, S., Yuk, K., Lee, H. and Lee, H. ( 2000). Virtual reality simulations in physics
education. Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced Learning
[Online]. Available: http://imej.wfu.edu/articles/2001/2/02/index.asp
Krijn, M. (2005). Virtual reality and specific phobias: Welcome to the real world. Retrieved
September 20, 2007 from
http://graphics.tudelft.nl/~vrphobia/Thesis_Krijn_DRUKKER.pdf
Lane, C. (1993). Display Technologies. Encyclopedia of Virtual Environments. World Wide Web
URL: http://www.hitl.washington.edu/scivw/EVE/I.A.1.Displays.html
Mantovani, F., Gaggiolo, A., Castelnuovo, G. & Riva, G. (2003). Virtual reality training for
health-care professionals. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 6(4), 389-395.
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
70
Moline, J. (1995). Virtual environments for health care. White paper for the advanced
technology program (ATP). National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Mousa, H. E. (n.d.). Alternative Virtual reality and virtual worlds development tools and
Health care! [Online], Available: http://www.goomedic.com/alternative-virtualreality-
and-virtual-worlds-development-tools-and-health-care.html
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being Digital. Vintage Books, New York, USA.
Neil, M. J. (1996). Architectural Virtual Reality Applications, Computer Graphics, 30, 53-54.
Newquist III, H. P. (1993). Virtual Reality Special Report. AI Expert.
North, M., North, S. & Coble, J. (1996). Virtual Reality Therapy. IPI Press, Colorado Springs,
CO, USA.
Onyesolu, M.O. (2009a). Virtual reality laboratories: The pedagogical effectiveness and use
in obtaining cheap laboratories using the computer laboratory, Journal of Science
Engineering and Technology, Vol. 16, No.1, (March 2009) 8679-8689, ISSN 1117-4196.
Onyesolu, M.O. (2009b). Virtual reality laboratories: An ideal solution to the problems
facing laboratory setup and management, Proceedings of world congress on
engineering and computer science 2009, pp. 291-295, ISBN: 978-988-17012-6-8, San
Francisco, USA, October 2009, Newswood Limited, Hong Kong.
Onyesolu, M.O. & Akpado, K.A. (2009). Virtual reality simulations in computer engineering
education. International Journal of Electrical and Telecommunication Systems Research,
Vol. 3, No.3, (July 2009) 56-61, ISSN 0795-2260.
Onyesolu, M.O. (2006). Virtual reality: An emerging computer technology of the 21st
century. International Journal of Electrical and Telecommunication Systems Research,
Vol. 1, No.1, (August 2006) 36-40, ISSN 0795-2260.
Schuemie, M.J. (2003). Human-Computer Interaction and Presence in Virtual Reality
Exposure Therapy. Retrieved September 23, 2006 from
http://graphics.tudelft.nl/~vrphobia/dissertation.pdf
Schuemie, M.J., Van Der Straaten, P., Krijn, M. & Van Der Mast, C.A.P.G. (2001). Research
on presence in virtual reality: A survey. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 4(2).
Smith, S. &. Lee, S. (2004). A pilot study for integrating virtual reality into an introductory
design and graphics course. Journal of Industrial Technology. 20(4).
Sulbaran, T. & Baker, N. C. (2000). Enhancing engineering education through distributed
virtual reality, 30th ASEE/IEEE frontiers in Education Conference, October 18-21,
Kansas City, MO, S1D-13 – S1D-18.
The Alphaville Herald: Interview with Ogoglio's Trevor Smith. [Online]. Available:
http://foo.secondlifeherald.com/slh/2007/01/interview_with_.html
Vince, J. (1995). Virtual Reality Systems. (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley).
Wang, C. & Cannon, D. J. (1996). Virtual-Reality-Based Point-and-Direct robotic inspection
in manufacturing. IEEE Trans.
We are virtual heroes. [Online]. Available: http://www.virtualheroes.com /about.asp
Williams, B.K., & Sawyer, S.C. (2001). Using Information Technology: A Practical Introduction to
Computers and Communications. McGraw Hill, ISBN 0-07-239803-5, New York.
Winn, W. & Bricken, W. (1992). Designing virtual worlds for use in mathematics education:
The example of experiential algebra, Educational Technology, 32 (12), 12-19.
Wittenberg, G. (1995). Training with virtual reality, Assembly Automation, 15 (3), 12-14.
Wittenberg, G. (1993). Virtual reality in engineering, The Industrial Robot, 20, 21-22.
Ziff Davis enterprise web buyer's guide. [Online]. Available:
http://www.webbuyersguide.com/product/brief.aspx?src=rss&kc=rss&id=52841
www.intechopen.com
Advances in Computer Science and Engineering
Edited by Dr. Matthias Schmidt
ISBN 978-953-307-173-2
Hard cover, 462 pages
Publisher InTech
Published online 22, March, 2011
Published in print edition March, 2011
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com
InTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821
The book Advances in Computer Science and Engineering constitutes the revised selection of 23 chapters
written by scientists and researchers from all over the world. The chapters cover topics in the scientific fields of
Applied Computing Techniques, Innovations in Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and
Applications and Advances in Applied Modeling.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Moses Okechukwu Onyesolu and Felista Udoka Eze (2011). Understanding Virtual Reality Technology:
Advances and Applications, Advances in Computer Science and Engineering, Dr. Matthias Schmidt (Ed.),
ISBN: 978-953-307-173-2, InTech, Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/advances-in-computerscience-
and-engineering/understanding-virtual-reality-technology-advances-and-applications
